ADR for PSQL Copy (#2930)
18F/piipan: docs/adr/0029-use-postgres-copy-for-bulk-upload.md

# Use Postgres Copy For Bulk Upload

## Status

> Proposed

Author: 👍

## Context

> Initially for bulk upload, we took the simplest approach of committing all participants in an upload within a single database transaction. This works fine for small uploads but we anticipated this may not be the appropriate approach for a production-ready system. The expected downsides to this approach are 1) Performance issues. What is the write performance of a transaction containing millions of records? What is the affect on record retrieval when a million or more records are being committed? 2) Any single bad record/participant would cause an entire state upload (likely millions of participants) to fail without clear indication as to the bad record 3) Difficulty communicating upload progress to end-users.

Author: This change makes sense.

- Because Event Grid continued to retry the upload, duplicate participants were added. For the 100k test I ran, over a million records were created in the database.

#### Observations (with transaction around entire upload):
- Database records were never created in the database, in neither the Uploads table nor the Participants table.
- Upon looking at Azure Metrics (specifically the Event Grid System Topic for uploads), we noticed that a) there were numerous upload events b) the upload events kept failing. The failures led Azure Event Grid to enter into an exponential backoff retry.

## Decision

Because of the performance test results, in addition to the other concerns listed above, we plan to enhance the performance of the bulk upload process. We will make three changes to improve this process. 1) We will introduce an Azure Storage queue to handle new bulk upload requests. 2) We will update the Azure ETL Function to pull new uploads from this queue and use Native PSQL COPY function to upload participants to the Postgres database. 3) We will increase the Azure Postgres storage size to 30GB, thus increasing it's overall storage and IOPs capacity.

## Consequences

> Event Grid only allows up to 30s to receive a response before considering the triggered failed and issuing a retry. By introducing a queuing mechanism via Azure Storage queues, we will decouple new upload events from the Azure ETL Function. New uploads will result in a new message in the Storage queue, eliminating the Event Grid 30s response problem. The ETL Function's trigger will be switched from an Event Grid Trigger to a Storage Queue Trigger and will pull messages from the queue. The Function app premier plan offers an unlimited maximum timeout duration for non-http triggered functions so it will be able to process uploads without timeouts.
> 
> Using the PSQL Copy functionality gives a signficant performance boost over a batch insert. Larger the uploads required us to increase the Connection & Command KeepAlive & Timeout settings but testing demonstrated it was orders of magnitude faster (17s for 100k records vs 30minutes, a couple minutes for 1.5 million records). 
> 
> By increasing the total provisioned Azure Postgres storage amount, we will also increase the I/O capacity available to the server. By increasing to 30GB, we'll be increasing the IOPS to "Provisioned 120, Up to 3,500" as well as increasing the storage available for database files, temporary files, transaction logs, and the PostgreSQL server logs. We do not expect this to raise the cost of significantly.
> 
> It's worth noting as a minor concern that this solution does couple us to Postgres and does not help with setting up future analysis streams. It also does not resolve the concern that one bad record will cause an entire upload to fail. As a result, we do not believe this is a long term solution for bulk imports but it will allow the NAC to handle import sizes of 1.5 million records which are expected with the MVP rollout. We will revisit other options in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We will limit the number of infrastructure and application changes necessary to meet our MVP requirements for the bulk upload process
- Event Grid event response times should become a non-issue as writing to a Queue Storage queue should be nearly instantaneous
- Sending large amounts of data via `COPY` requires some fine-tuning of database connection details and resources. This may become impractical from a technical and/or pricing perspective as more states are onboarded to the system.
- Using `COPY` functionality gives a significant performance boost over per-row inserts. Larger uploads required us to increase the Connection & Command KeepAlive & Timeout settings but testing demonstrated it was orders of magnitude faster (17s for 100k records vs 30minutes, a couple minutes for 1.5 million records). 
- This solution does not directly address the issue with one bad record causing an entire upload to fail.
- We are coupling our approach to PostgreSQL in a way that past decisions have attempted to avoid. Other database options like Azure SQL support similar bulk insert mechanisms, but our initial approach will be specific to PostgreSQL.
- This solution does not help with setting up future analysis streams. As a result, we are not confident this is a long term solution for bulk imports but it will allow the NAC to handle import sizes of 1.5 million records which are expected with the MVP rollout. We will revisit other options in the future.
```

*Suggestion (non-blocking):* Wanted to add a couple consequences (database tuning, reference to past desire to avoid coupling to PostgreSQL where possible) and it ended up feeling like a list was the better approach.

Author: 👍

> This solution does not resolve issues with erroneous runs triggering retries and introducing duplicate records. It does not resolve the issue with one bad record causing an entire upload to fail. Additionally, this approach couples us to Postgres and does not help with setting up future analysis streams. As a result, we do not believe this is a long term solution for bulk imports but it will allow the NAC to handle import sizes of 1.5 million records which are expected with the MVP rollout. We will revisit other options in the future.

Reviewer: Whoops — looks an old version of this comment snuck in. Resolving this one in favor of https://github.com/18F/piipan/pull/2930#discussion_r842070862

> This solution does not resolve issues with erroneous runs triggering retries and introducing duplicate records. It does not resolve the issue with one bad record causing an entire upload to fail. Additionally, this approach couples us to Postgres and does not help with setting up future analysis streams. As a result, we do not believe this is a long term solution for bulk imports but it will allow the NAC to handle import sizes of 1.5 million records which are expected with the MVP rollout. We will revisit other options in the future.

Author: No, I removed that bullet. That was a copy/paste error from the initial version of this API.

## Resources

- [Azure Storage](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/postgresql/flexible-server/concepts-compute-storage)

> - [Azure Function Timeouts](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/functions-scale#timeout)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Azure Function Timeouts](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/functions-scale#timeout)
- [4. Default database](./0004-default-database.md)
```

*Suggestion (non-blocking):* Might be helpful to refer back to our previous PostgreSQL decision.
